Abstract
Bacteriophages have been used in soil column studies for the last several decades as surrogates to study
the fate and transport behavior of enteric viruses in groundwater. However, recent studies have shown that the
transport behavior of bacteriophages and enteric viruses in porous media can be very different. The next generation
of virus transport science must therefore provide more data on mobility of enteric viruses and the relationship
between transport behaviors of enteric viruses and bacteriophages. To achieve this new paradigm, labor intensity
devoted to enteric virus quantification method must be reduced. Recent studies applied quantitative polymerase
chain reaction (qPCR) to column filtration experiments to study the transport behavior of human adenovirus
(HAdV) in porous media under a variety of conditions. A similar approach can be used to study the transport
of other enteric viruses such as norovirus. Analyzing the column samples with both qPCR and culture assays
and applying multiplex qPCR to study cotransport behavior of more than one virus will provide information to
under-explored areas in virus transport science. Both nucleic acid extraction kits and one-step lysis protocols have
been used in these column studies to extract viral nucleic acid for qPCR quantification. The pros and cons of both
methods are compared herein and solutions for overcoming problems are suggested. As better understanding of
the transport behavior of enteric viruses is clearly needed, we strongly advocate for application of rapid molecular
tools in future studies as well as optimization of protocols to overcome their current limitations.

Introduction
Enteric viruses such as adenovirus, enterovirus, and
norovirus have been found in various water environments
and land-applied biosolids (Katayama et al. 2002, 2008;
Fong et al. 2007; Xagoraraki et al. 2007; Wong et al.
2010). Exposure to them causes a variety of diseases in
humans and as a consequence, they have been included
on the U.S Environmental Protection Agency Drinking
1 Ecosystem Research Division, USEPA Office of Research and
Development, National Exposure Research Laboratory, 960 College
Station Road, Athens, GA 30605.
2
Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education, 1299 Bethel
Valley Road, Oak Ridge, TN 37831.
3
Corresponding author: Ecosystem Research Division, USEPA
Office of Research and Development, National Exposure Research
Laboratory, 960 College Station Road, Athens, GA 30605; 1-706355-8113; fax: 1-706-355-8104; wongchi@uga.edu
Received September 2016, accepted April 2017.
© 2017, National Ground Water Association.
doi: 10.1111/gwat.12531

NGWA.org

Water Contamination Candidate List. Since they are
much more mobile than bacteria in porous media due
to their small size (usually below 100 nm) (Maier et al.
2009), infiltration of biosolid-associated enteric viruses
into groundwater is thus a major concern. To protect the
water environment, tremendous effort has been invested
over the last several decades to gain a solid understanding
of the fate and transport behavior of viruses in the
subsurface (Schijven and Hassanizadeh 2000; Jin and
Flury 2002; Zhuang and Jin 2003; Attinti et al. 2010;
Horswell et al. 2010; Syngouna and Chrysikopoulos 2013;
Kokkinos et al. 2015).
The transport of viruses in subsurface environments
depend on the processes of advection, dispersion, diffusion, size exclusion, retention, and release from the
soil-water and air-water interfaces (Bradford et al. 2014).
Mathematical models have been developed to understand
and predict the complex virus transport process in subsurface. Soil columns have been used in numerous studies to
generate breakthrough curve (BTC) data for grasping the
Groundwater

1

effect of these processes on virus transport and developing
models that predict virus mobility in the subsurface (Schijven and Hassanizadeh 2000; Jin and Flury 2002; Attinti
et al. 2010; Bradford et al. 2014). A reliable BTC requires
frequent measurements of effluent samples and replication
of column experiments. Because it is much more time- and
resource-consuming to perform culture analysis for enteric
viruses than bacteriophages assays, most virus transport
studies have only focused on bacteriophages, under the
assumption that phages are accurate surrogates for enteric
viruses (Pang et al. 2014; Wong et al. 2014; Stevenson
et al. 2015).
Advanced molecular techniques such as polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) are much less time-consuming than
culture methods and numerous monitoring studies have
already applied molecular tools to detect enteric viruses
in different water systems (Wong et al. 2012a). Indeed,
the recent increase in literature reporting the occurrence
of enteric viruses is mostly attributed to the availability
of PCR viral assays. It is time for virus transport studies
to incorporate advanced molecular methods, particularly
quantitative PCR (qPCR), to monitor the concentration
of viral contaminants of high public health concern in
complex environmental matrices. In this issue paper, the
main goal therefore is to discuss the needs for a substantial
increase in transport data of enteric viruses, and discuss
the opportunities and challenges of applying qPCR to
column transport experiments.

2013), having caused numerous waterborne and foodborne
outbreaks (Vega et al. 2014). There is thus a strong need
to study mobility and attachment behavior of norovirus
in the subsurface environment. qPCR will be the best
tool for quantifying HNoV in column studies because
there is no practical culture system for HNoV (Koo et al.
2012). Since animal noroviruses such as feline and murine
norovirus can be cultured to a high titer, they can be used
as a surrogate for HNoV in column study and their qPCR
primers have already been developed (Baert et al. 2008;
Di Pasquale et al. 2010) and applied in other studies to
investigate the persistence of norovirus in water and under
thermal treatment (Seitz et al. 2011; Zonta et al. 2015).
Because numerous areas in environmental virology
have benefited from application of qPCR, including recent
HAdV transport studies, new and exciting information
will be added to virus transport science if more studies
apply molecular techniques to investigate enteric virus
motilities in column systems and compare transport
behavior of bacteriophages and enteric viruses, side-byside. This will be critical to identify bacteriophages that
can be accurate surrogates for the presence, fate, and
transport of enteric viruses in surface and ground waters.
Until then, it is only a guessing game – with relative
approximations of mobility at best – which can lead
to significant under- and/or over-estimation of human
exposure to pathogenic viruses.

Needs for Understanding the Transport Behavior
of Enteric Viruses
Three recent studies by independent research groups
(Shi et al. 2012; Pang et al. 2014; Wong et al. 2014),
applied qPCR to column filtration experiments and they
all found mobility of human adenovirus (HAdV, the
most prevalent enteric virus in water environments)
(Wong et al. 2012a) to be much lower than MS2 (the
most frequently used bacteriophage in virus transport
studies) (Jin and Flury 2002; Wong et al. 2014) in sand
media. Another study also found mass recovery of HAdV
from glass beads column effluents lower than coliphage
reported in previous studies (Kokkinos et al. 2015). One
study, however, reported higher retention of MS2 than
HAdV in fine granular limestone aquifer material; and
suggested that PRD1 was a better transport indicator than
MS2 for HAdV in this type of media (Stevenson et al.
2015). Besides HAdV, rotavirus was also found to be
much less mobile than MS2 (Pang et al. 2014). This
information is extremely valuable because it indicates that
assuming MS2 is an accurate transport surrogate for all
enteric viruses in soil systems can lead to significant error.
Moreover, risk associated with HAdV and rotavirus can be
under- or over-estimated (depending on the media types)
if MS2 transport data are used to determine HAdV levels
in groundwater systems.
Besides HAdV and rotavirus, no studies have applied
qPCR to report BTC data of other enteric viruses. Human
norovirus (HNoV) is recognized as the leading cause
of acute gastroenteritis for all age groups (Hall et al.

Analyzing Column Samples Using Both qPCR and Culture
Assays
Even though culture assays are tedious, future column
studies should consider analyzing the results using both
qPCR and culture methods since attachment to soil
and soil organic matter can cause virus inactivation
(Schijven and Hassanizadeh 2000; Silva et al. 2015).
Culture method is only able to detect viable viruses but
qPCR is able to detect naked nucleic acid (NA), capsiddamaged viruses, viable but non-culturable viruses, and
culturable viruses. Therefore, if filtration processes can
cause viruses to become inactivated or damaged, the
difference between virus count by qPCR and culture
assay can be attributed to inactivation. Both qPCR and
culture methods have been used to analyze samples from
HAdV sorption isotherm experiments (Silva et al. 2015).
In this study, the authors reported that although organic
matter did not lower gene copy numbers in the liquid
phase, it reduced the infectivity of HAdV, indicating that
organic matter did not enhance attachment of HAdV, but
inactivated them instead. This information is extremely
useful since a comprehensive fate and transport model
includes both attachment/detachment and inactivation
factors (Bradford et al. 2014). Because culturing enteric
viruses is labor intensive, comparison of bacteriophage
BTCs obtained from qPCR and culture assays can offer a
fast and cost effective approach, especially because until
now, no phage column study has reported BTC results
using both culture and qPCR techniques. Having phage
BTC results obtained by both techniques will improve

2

K. Wong and M. Molina Groundwater

NGWA.org

our understanding on the factors causing the removal of
virus during groundwater filtration.
Application of Multiplex qPCR for Cotransport Study
Previous transport studies have investigated virus
transport influenced by environmental factors such as
ionic strength, ion composition, pH, organic matter, and
soil types which are very relevant since they strongly
influence virus deposition to soil particles (Jin and
Flury 2002; Zhuang and Jin 2003; Yuan et al. 2008;
Wong et al. 2012b, 2014). However, many different
types of viruses including bacteriophage and human,
plant, and animal pathogenic viruses are present in the
natural water and wastewater environments (Rosario et al.
2009) and their coexistence can lead to competition
for the binding sites in porous media, consequently
influencing transport of individual viruses. Virus transport
behavior determined by previous column filtration studies
have mostly focused on a single virus; however, a
variety of studies have shown that transport of virus or
bacteria can be influenced by the copresence of clay
colloids (Vasiliadou and Chrysikopoulos 2011; Syngouna
and Chrysikopoulos 2013). This finding implies that
copresence of biocolloids, such as other viruses, can also
influence individual virus transport behavior. Therefore,
there is a need to investigate the effect of copresence of
multiple microbes on the transport behavior of individual
viruses. We recommend that future studies focusing on
virus transport consider including copresence of bacteria
and viruses as well as high and low binding viruses.
Multiplex qPCR detects and quantifies multiple organisms
in one qPCR run, using multiple primers and probes
specific to the targeted microbes. It has been applied in
previous studies to detect and quantify multiple enteric
viruses in the water environment (Wolf et al. 2010; Wong
and Xagoraraki 2010). Because analytical measurement
of multiple microbes is required in cotransport studies,
multiplex qPCR will definitely be more efficient and cost
effective than culture or single qPCR assays. The outcome
of these studies will enhance our understanding of the
interactions between mixed microbial/viral communities
and virus transport in groundwater.
Challenges and Solutions Associated with Applying qPCR
for Virus Soil Column Studies
While we strongly support this new paradigm of virus
transport, there are still technical challenges associated
with applying qPCR to study virus filtration in soil column
systems. In our opinion, the major challenge applying
qPCR to virus column studies is preparing high-quality
NA templates.
Typical NA extraction kits such as mini column
filtration can prepare high-quality NA by lysing almost
any virus capsid and removing PCR inhibitors such as
soil humic acid (Wilson 1997). Because multiple steps
(e.g., lysing, cleaning, filtration, and elution) are required
with kits, the primary deterrent to this technique is its
inconsistent recovery rate due to accumulation of error
from each step (Table 1). Inconsistent NA recovery
NGWA.org

reduces the accuracy of calculating the virus retained
in soil columns and smoothness of the BTC, which are
key results in determining virus attachment/detachment
behavior and model development. It can also be very
time-consuming and costly to extract NA using kits,
especially with the large number of effluent samples
usually generated from column experiments. However,
when dealing with very inhibited samples, extraction kits
are the most effective method for removing inhibitors.
To overcome inconsistent recovery rates, replicate or
triplicate extractions are highly recommended. Replicate
samples are especially important for the influent sample
since the mass recovery for the column experiment is
determined by measuring the area under the plot of C e /C o
vs. pore volume (or BTC) (Pang et al. 2014; Wong et al.
2014), where C o is the influent concentration and C e
is the concentrations of effluent samples collected at
different pore volumes. Extra attention should therefore be
given to the accuracy of C o since it involves calculating
all values in the breakthrough plot. To lessen the labor
effort, high throughput 96-well extraction kits (e.g.,
PureLink® Pro 96 Viral RNA/DNA Purification Kit,
ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts) can be
considered for extracting virus NAs from large numbers
of effluent samples; and a multichannel pipette is also
highly recommended to take full advantage of the highthroughput feature of 96-well extraction kits.
An alternative way to release NA from virus capsids
for direct qPCR analysis without using extraction kits is
offered by following the QuickExtract DNA (Epicentre,
Madison, Wisconsin) protocol. This quick protocol in
combination with 95 ◦ C heating resulted in effective
adenovirus and MS2 capsid lysis, respectively, producing
high-quality NAs suitable for immediate qPCR analysis
(Wong et al. 2014). We believe the one-step lysis method
provides more consistent NA extraction recovery than the
kit-based method since only a lysing step is involved
(Table 1). This method has only been tested with HAdV
and MS2 (Wong et al. 2012b, 2014), therefore, future
studies should focus on testing and developing protocols
that can effectively lyse other enteric viruses for direct
qPCR analysis. Because clean-up is not involved, the
PCR inhibition caused by environmental inhibitors such as
humic acid is a major hurdle to overcome when using this
method. One way to overcome PCR inhibition drawbacks
is through dilution with molecular grade water (Pang et al.
2014; Wong et al. 2014). The recently developed qPCR
platform, digital PCR (dPCR), can also be considered
because it is less susceptible to inhibition (Hindson et al.
2013; Rački et al. 2014; Pavšič et al. 2016). Moreover,
no calibration curve is needed for quantification by dPCR
since it is based on a Bayesian Probabilistic framework
(Hindson et al. 2013). This can be extremely useful
in analyzing effluent samples with multiple aqueous
chemistry matrices since our previous study showed water
chemistry (e.g., ionic composition) can slightly shift qPCR
threshold values (Wong et al. 2012b, 2014), meaning that
separate standard curves are needed to quantify the virus
in each water matrix.
K. Wong and M. Molina Groundwater

3

Table 1
Comparison Between Using Extraction Kits and One-Step Lysis Protocol to Prepare Virus Nucleic Acid
from Soil Column Samples for qPCR Analysis

Extraction kit

One-step lysis

Disadvantages/Problems

Eliminates most inhibition

Inconsistent recovery can affect
accuracy of mass recovery and
smoothness of breakthrough
curve
Long labor time and high cost

96-wells extraction plate

Cannot handle highly inhibited
samples

Dilution, digital PCR, switch to
extraction kits

Conditions vary for different
enteric viruses
Different standard curves are
needed for samples having
different aqueous chemistry
matrices

Specific optimization for each
virus, switch to extraction kits
Dilution, digital PCR, switch to
extraction kits

Extracts NA from most
viruses
Minimal concern over
inconsistency in extraction
recovery rates between
samples

Overall, we recommend using one-step lysis protocol
only when inhibition from environmental contaminants is
not too strong to interfere with the qPCR quantification.
Since application of molecular techniques to column
studies is still in the early stages, it is worthwhile
for future studies to compare the BTCs and mass
recovery from extraction kits and one-step lysis protocol,
and determine the effectiveness of each under different
conditions.
In addition to issues associated with NA extraction,
PCR is able to detect the capsid-free NA (cfNA) so
it is important to run the column experiment using a
stock composed of mostly intact virus since transport
of viruses and their NAs can be very different. This is
especially important when studying DNA viruses since
capsid-free RNA usually degrades very quickly in the
environment. We recommend using well-preserved or
freshly grown stocks to conduct experiments so numbers
of cfNA will be minimal. Another way to reduce cfNA
in the stock is to add DNase or RNase, but they must be
removed prior to column experiment and qPCR analysis
(Kokkinos et al. 2015). The difference between the qPCR
threshold values of virus stock before and after lysing
can determine intactness of viruses. The threshold value
before lysing should be higher than afterward and the
bigger the difference, the higher the portion of intact
virus in the stock. Also, DNA-labeled protein-coated silica
nanoparticles were recently used to mimic actual virus
transport through a column system; no capsid lysis was
needed because DNA is covalently attached to the silica
nanoparticles (Pang et al. 2014). Enteric viruses may
not be allowed for field scale column studies such as
lysimeters due to biosafety concerns. Protein-coated silica
nanoparticles can therefore serve as a surrogate in field
studies since they are not considered pathogenic to human
4

Recommendations to Lessen
the Problems

Advantages

K. Wong and M. Molina Groundwater

Replicate extractions, particularly
on influent samples

health (Pang et al. 2014). Since only one study has applied
this technology in virus transport, more studies are needed
to explore and validate this engineered nanomaterial’s
ability to mimic virus transport.

Conclusion
Based on the extensive development of molecular
detection technology in the last couple decades, virus
transport science should be able to provide more detailed
data on mobility of enteric viruses in subsurface porous
media. Considering how studies on waterborne pathogen
detection have increased since development of PCRrelated technology (Girones et al. 2010; Aw and Rose
2012), studies on mobility of enteric viruses in porous
media are surprisingly scarce. We believe there is a
great opportunity for scientists and engineers to contribute
valuable, exciting breakthrough results in this underexplored area and to make a significant contribution
preventing groundwater pollution by enteric viruses.
Disclaimer: This article has been subjected to the
U.S.EPA’s peer and administrative review and has been
approved for publication. The mention of trade names or
commercial products in this report does not constitute
endorsement or recommendation for use by the U.S.
Government.

